Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we're going to learn more about what our blog output's or saves, let's jump right
into the action.
So in the last couple of lessons, we've seen that if you change the HTML structure for the save function
for our block type.
Right.
So if we go down to our save function and if we change the HTML, that gets output.
So if I say today the sky is completely blank, if I save that and then refresh, we've seen that that
causes a problem.
Right.
And then you need to delete the block and then insert a fresh copy.
So in this lesson, I want to explain why this is happening and how we can adjust our code so that we
can make changes without this happening.
However, even once we do that, we'll see that this approach of just saving a static string of text
as the output for our block type.
We'll see why.
Perhaps this isn't what we want at all.
So towards the end of this lesson, we'll learn how to make the output of our block truly dynamic.
First, though, to start off the lesson, let's talk about why we are seeing this error message.
To explain this, let's look at the database entry for this post.
So here is that instance of our block type in the database.
And remember, towards the end of our last lesson, we learned that if you let the saved string of text
act as your source of truth, then WordPress doesn't even need to save your attributes in a comment
like this.
Well, even though we aren't using that approach and we do have our attributes in the comment, WordPress
wants to keep that option open to us, meaning it needs to be able to trust the saved text because remember,
if we're using the source and selector properties to extract the values out of this string of text,
well, WordPress needs to be able to trust this text.
And if we're changing the structure of this, then there's no guarantee that your selector is going
to select the same value.
Now, there is a way around this problem.
It is possible to change your HTML structure and then have WordPress figure things out on its own.
Let me show you how this would work with our code.
But first, before we get into that, let's make sure we're all on the same page.
Let's make sure we're working with a block that hasn't already ran into an error.
So what I mean by that is I'm going to go into the edit screen for this post.
Let's delete that.
And I'm just going to make sure I have a new instance that is working's.
Also a blue green and save it.
OK, so now from this example, how would we be able to change the saved HTML structure without running
into that error?
Well, all we need to do is provide WordPress sort of a history of how this is going to change.
What I mean by that is up at the top.
Well, it doesn't even need to be up at the top, but we just want to provide another top level property.
So just like we have title and icon and category and attributes, edit and save, we want a new top
level property called deprecated so we could, for example, add it at the very bottom.
So after our save function, which is the last property, got a comma here, let's add a new top level
property, call it deprecated.
It needs to be this exact name, Colon, and then you give it an array and what do you give it an array
of well, objects.
So for now, let's just give it one object.
You can drop down inside this object.
You just need to give it the attributes and save values and functions from the previous version.
So, for example, imagine I want to remove the word completely that change alone would create the error.
And imagine I also want to change it from a paragraph to maybe a heading level three.
So before we make any of those changes, we want to provide sort of a backup copy of the current working
version in our deprecated object.
So just take the entire save property and its value here.
So just write up before the comma.
Copy that in your clipboard and paste it into your deprecated object.
OK, and then in the deprecated object, we also want to give it the attributes that we have now to
avoid duplicating and having the attributes spelled out in multiple places.
You could create a variable up at the very top of this file, call it attributes and have it equal this
object and then just reference that.
But for a quick solution.
We don't care if there's a little bit of duplicate code.
This is just an example.
So you can just select the property attributes, colon, the value.
We don't need the comma.
Just copy that into your clipboard down in the deprecated object maybe right before save.
Let's paste that in.
And then we actually did want a comma after that.
Let me fix the indentation here, but.
OK, so now that we have this sort of backed up or deprecated copy of the way things were and WordPress
can compare against this, we are free to make changes to the actual save a version of our function.
So now I can remove the word completely and I could change this from a paragraph to a heading level
three.
OK, and if we go ahead and save this and then refresh in the admin edit screen.
Perfect, we did not receive any sort of error message and we can even change these values and if we
save or update our post and go view it on the front end notice, cool.
It's not a paragraph.
It's a heading level three.
The word completely is missing.
Perfect, because practice makes perfect.
Let's try having another new version, which will really illustrate why we had to give this an array.
Right when we said deprecated is an array of objects.
Well, you could just have another object in there.
So before that first one, curly brackets for an object, comma, before the new one.
Inside this first one, you could just do the exact same thing.
So if we wanted to change this again, you would just take the old copy of it and put it in this deprecated
object so you would just grab the same function pasted in there.
You would also grab your attributes.
Copy that in the newest deprecated copy right above that.
Just paste it in.
Be sure to have a comma.
Let me fix the indentation a bit, OK?
Now imagine if I wanted to say today the sky is absolutely blank and maybe I want this to be a heading
level six.
Give that a save back in the admin edit screen.
We can refresh as many times as we want to, there's no problem, there's no error, I can set this
back to blue and green.
We can save it if we view it on the front end.
Perfect is an H six with the word.
Absolutely.
This is great.
So we can make changes to the HTML structure.
However, even with this in place, there's still one huge reason why I personally never create block
types like this.
When I say block types like this, what I mean is the official WordPress documentation considers this
type of a save function that returns just a static string of text.
It considers that to be sort of the default or standard way that a block type should be.
And while, yes, the documentation does provide an alternative that we're going to learn about in a
minute or two, the fact remains that they consider this sort of the standard de facto way that a block
should work.
And in my personal opinion, this is borderline useless.
Let me explain why.
So, yes, with the power of the deprecated property, we can freely make changes to the HTML structure.
However, we still need to actively open the post in the admin edit screen and then actually receive
or update it.
What I mean is just creating a new version of our JavaScript file, just that action of us changing
that doesn't do anything in order for our content to actually get updated, someone needs to go edit
that post and receive it.
And while that might not seem like a problem, hypothetically in the real world, it is because in the
real world you might have hundreds of posts or thousands of posts.
And if you've used a blog type on all thousands of your posts, no one wants to have to manually receive
and update those posts in the editor.
So with a few exceptions, I do not like this type of a block.
The exceptions would be if maybe you had a really simple block type and you had near 100 percent certainty
that you would never need to change its HTML whatsoever, then this approach would be OK.
Or if your website is never going to have more than 10 or 20 posts and you wouldn't care if you had
to manually receive a post, then again, this approach could work for you.
But personally, the big reason I use WordPress in the first place is because it makes it easy to automatically
and programmatically manage huge amounts of content, write hundreds or thousands of posts.
So having said all of that, I am not a big fan at all of this type of a block where what you're outputting
or saving is just a static string of text that's going to get saved into the database.
I only showed this to you because, again, I don't want to be totally dogmatic and force all of my
opinions on you without at least first showing you sort of the standard way that WordPress works.
But at this point, now that we've covered this, I do want to show you my preferred way of creating
block types.
It's something called a dynamic block.
And really the only difference is our save function is simply going to return null or basically nothing.
So do this with me.
Your save property should just be a function that returns null.
And what we're doing is removing the responsibility from JavaScript to HTTP.
This means we don't have to save some static text into the database.
We can let P determine this value on the fly and this will open up the door to truly powerful and flexible
block types where even if you've used them in 10000 posts, you're still free to change them and they
will all be updated immediately.
Now, before we jump into our file, we no longer need this deprecated property, right?
If we're transferring the responsibility of the output to be, then our JavaScript definitely doesn't
need this big deprecated object or array of objects.
So let's get rid of deprecated.
Let's save that file.
And our next step, we scroll up to the top.
Remember how we registered this block type with JavaScript, with this namespace and this exact name?
Well, now we just want to go into our P and register a block type with this exact same matching name
and just give it a render function that's responsible for the output.
So in our plugin folder, let's jump into our index file and let's make a few adjustments so we know.